* lively fanfare plays *
¡Hola! Soy Boots.
Enjoy the movie!
- [animals chirping]
- * dramatic music plays *
[narrator] Our story begins
in the Amazon rainforest.
- A forest where it rains...
- [thunder booms]
...a lot.
This is the biggest jungle
on Earth
and yet the least explored.
Until the greatest explorer
came along.
And her name was Dora.
[babbling]
[giggling]
[narrator] From the moment
she came into this world.
Dora wanted to explore it.
Pump the brakes. chiquitos.
You're too young
to go into the jungle.
- But Mom. por favor.
- Por favor. Tía Elena.
[narrator] As Dora grew up.
she knew in her heart
the jungle was calling to her.
For she was destined to explore
the world.
Life is an adventure.
Always follow your
inner compass. ¡Vamos!
[both] ¡Vamos!
[adventure theme song plays]
[singers]
* Camila the Crusader *
[narrator]
Together. with cousin Diego.
they dreamt of wild adventures.
Whoa!
- Gotcha!
- [giggles]
[narrator] Yet. with
every new path and journey.
their unshakable bond remained
their greatest treasure.
Escuchen. mis pequeñitos.
No matter where
your journeys lead.
you must always remember
the power of Ayllu.
What's Ayllu. Abuelo?
It means teamwork.
Ayllu is a bond
that connects us all.
It's about being together.
Helping each other.
So. like me and Dora?
[laughs] ¡Exactamente. Diego!
Vamos.
This way! [chuckles]
[both] Whoa!
* stirring music playing *
[distant bird calls]
What are those?
Quipu bracelets.
The Incas used these strings
as their language.
Each knot tells a story.
and now you can write
your own story
by adding new knots
for every adventure.
Ayllu through and through!
[both]
Whoa.
The jungle is so big.
Do you ever get lost out here?
You can never get lost
when you're exploring.
And if you ever need
to find your way.
just look for the Chakana.
the cross in the sky.
[gasps] ¡Lo veo! I see it!
The Incas believed
the stars were like maps.
Their patterns guided them
through the jungle.
Many Doras and Diegos ago.
one magical star fell
from the sky.
giving life to the jungle below.
The Incas called it Sol Dorado.
The Golden Sun.
Legend says it's hidden
in the jungle
and has the power to grant
one selfless wish.
One that must strengthen
the power of Ayllu.
* wistful music plays
Make a wish. Dora.
[blows]
[both] Whoa!
- What'd you wish for?
- To find Sol Dorado
so we can explore
together forever.
A map.
Every explorer needs a map.
* dramatic music builds. fades *
It's blank.
Ah! But only for now.
You see. this is a special map.
Wherever you want to go.
this map will get you there.
And now. my exploradora.
you're ready to find Sol Dorado.
* dramatic music playing *
* If there's a place
you gotta go *
* I'm the one you need to know
I'm the map *
* I'm the map. I'm the map.
I'm the map! *
[animal chittering]
* ominous music plays *
Hmm.
[gasps]
Hey. little monkey friend.
Don't be afraid.
You can come out.
[chittering meekly]
Oh. a splinter. That must hurt.
[chittering in agreement]
Here. You can keep these boots
until your monkey paw
gets better.
Soy Dora. What's your name?
- Boots?
- [giggles]
No. silly. Those are boots.
Do you have a name?
Boots! Boots!
Okay! Hi. Boots!
Where's your home?
[whimpers. chitters sadly]
Oh. You're lost.
You can come home with me!
[chitters happily]
[chittering]
* adventure music playing
* music turns dark *
[tropical birds calling]
[whimpers] Oh no.
Boots. I think I'm lost too.
But who do we ask for help
when we don't know
which way to go?
Boots?
We ask the map!
[chittering happily]
[shimmering]
¡Gracias. Map!
* upbeat dramatic music
playing *
* funky upbeat music plays *
[sighing]
Today's the day we're gonna
find you. Sol Dorado.
* upbeat music continues *
Buenos días. Papá. Morning.
Guillermo. Hola. Isabella.
Buenos. Dora. Watch your step.
Rafa got out again!
[gasps. chuckles] Found Rafa!
[croaking]
Hola. Abuela.
- Oh. buen día. amor.
- Gracias.
Hola. Tío Nico.
Hola. Dora. Good morning.
[chittering]
Buen día. Tía Sabrina.
Good morning. Dora!
[giggles] Thanks!
[Boots chittering happily]
[Boots munching]
[drill whirring loudly]
¡Salud. Mamá! Whoa! [giggles]
Ay! Gracias. Dora.
* music softens *
Te quiero. Abuelo. I miss you.
* upbeat music resumes *
Hey. Diego!
Hola. Capitán Cappy.
the cutest little capybara.
- Hola. Dora.
- [Cappy chitters]
Alright. where are we
going today. exploradora?
Let's see.
for today's adventure...
Drum roll. please.
Ooh! Ooh...
...we're continuing our
lifelong search for Sol Dorado.
Muy bien. Lead the way. cousin.
Let me grab Boots.
I have a really good feeling
about today.
- Yeah. you say that every day.
- And every day it's true.
Plus. Abuelo taught us
to explore every nearby cave
and this is the last one
on the list
and everybody knows
the last place you look
is always the place you find
what you were looking for!
Just promise this isn't one of
those scary and ominous caves.
[bats screeching]
This is scary and ominous!
What? It's perfectly warm
and cozy.
[gulp] I'm from here
and even I don't want to drive
through that neighborhood!
- [chittering]
- Wait. what's Boots saying?
He says... this is gonna be
so much fun.
This is a bad idea. Dora.
I'm seeing lots
of red flags here.
[worried chittering]
* suspenseful musical stinger *
[creature growling]
See? It's inviting us.
[Boots chittering]
Uh. yeah. you guys go ahead.
[nervous chuckle]
Yeah. I'm-I'm not into caves.
Or dying.
[worried chittering]
* ominous music playing *
* If there's a place
you got to get *
* I can get you there. I bet *
* I'm the map. I'm the map.
I'm the map. I'm the map *
No offense. but do you
always have to sing that song?
Uh. yes. it's catchy.
Do you have to do
the rope thing?
This is a safety precaution.
in case we have to find
our way back out.
- That's what the map is for.
- Look. we agreed.
You're the search.
I'm the rescue.
Leave our exit strategy
to me. ¿comprendes?
- [both gasp]
- Is this a booby trap?
[screams]
[laughs] Wow.
Tell me again.
who's rescuing who?
Wow. These Incas were experts
at guarding their treasure.
I mean. check out
the engineering here.
These traps are
seriously amazing!
Tell that to him.
* eerie musical stinger *
[chuckles]
[rope retracts]
Well... you're the map.
Lead the way. exploradora.
And lead fast because I gotta be
at work in two hours.
Let's see. To the left.
we have a pit of snakes.
[hissing]
To the right.
a tarantula's nest.
Wait... if this is that
and we're here...
then Sol Dorado
should be right here!
- [rumbling]
- [shrieking]
[rope retracts. clicks]
Dora. you okay?
Uh. I'm hanging in there.
Should be here somewhere...
[soft gasp]
Found it!
[rope extending]
[Dora grunts]
[sighs] Ew. what is this?
Ay. guácala.
Just be careful. okay?
- * eerie music playing
- [flashlight clicks]
[liquid running]
Oh! This is a quipu!
Abuelo taught us that
the Incas used these knots
to tell a message.
[speaking Quechua]
[continues speaking Quechua]
[speaks English]
"Legend for you to see.
sun. key."
[gasps] Got it!
"The Legend waits
for you to see.
within the sun
you'll find the key!"
Great! You see anything?
[soft gasp]
Yeah...
I don't think this is
Sol Dorado though.
It's a sundial.
Whatever you do. don't touch it.
This ain't my first
bomba-trampa.
[heavy breathing]
* eerie music playing *
* music intensifies *
[clunking]
[laughs]
Too easy.
[mechanism creaking]
Woo! Lo hicimos.
- Let's go.
- [creaking. cracking]
[gasps]
- [rumbling]
- [gasps]
Giant boulder! [gasps]
Huh?
[chuckles]
Aww! Tiny boulder?
[Dora shrieks]
[gasping]
Uh. tell me again
who's rescuing who?
[scoffs] Go. Diego. go!
¡Actívate!
* dramatic music playing *
You got this.
[both grunting]
* dramatic music continues *
[gasps]
Map!
* mournful dramatic
music plays *
* music fades *
[insects chirring]
[indistinct chatter]
Diego. you don't like
my cooking?
Abuelita. I love
your cooking but--
- Oh. then you can have more.
- [splat]
Dora. Can you pass
the salsa verde?
Dora? The salsa.
On your left? Your other left.
- Sorry. Mamá.
- Thank you.
Amor. ¿qué te pasa?
What's the matter?
Nada.
Do you believe that nada?
"Nada" word of it! [laughs]
[all laughing]
She lost her map.
[laughter stops]
Uh-oh.
Well. maybe
you don't need a map.
He's right. mi chiquita.
You already know the jungle
better than any map.
No map? That's like...
Indiana Jones
without his whip or...
Thor without his hammer
or Boots without his boots!
Girl. preach!
My map was special.
Abuelito gave it to me.
It's the reason why
I'm a real explorer.
How can I lead the way
if I don't know which way to go?
Without Map...
I think our adventures are over.
Permiso.
[splutters]
[chitters sadly]
* wistful music plays *
Thought I'd find you out here.
Just wanted to watch the sunset.
[Dora sighs]
Did you know that there's. um.
this thing
called the Green Flash?
It sounds like a superhero.
but it's not. [laughs]
It's this green flash
that happens at sunset.
and if you ever see it...
it's a sign
from someone you miss.
letting you know that things
are going to be okay.
I've never seen it.
I'm really sorry about Map.
But it doesn't mean
our adventures have to be over.
Sometimes life just takes us
in a new direction.
Actually. I have some big news.
[Dora] Camila the Crusader?
She's the new manager
of Jungle World?
Is this the big news
you wanted to tell me?
Yeah! [chuckles] Wild. isn't it?
This is huge!
This is... incredible!
Diego. do you know what this is?
- Huge and incredible?
- This is my new direction!
I can work at Jungle World
with you!
You want to work
at Jungle World?
Why not? I get to spend
all day with you
and Camila the Crusader.
Can I say best summer ever?
Please. Diego.
This could be our next
big adventure together.
I mean. okay.
if that's what you want!
[sighs] Ayllu.
[chuckles] Through and through.
[bird calls]
* thrilling music playing *
[sighs excitedly]
Hi! Soy Dora. Dora the Employee!
¡Hola! Hi. hello. Aloha.
Bonjour. Wow.
Shalom. [chuckles]
[tropical bird calling]
¡Hola! I'm Dora.
I'm looking for the manager
of Jungle World.
That would be me.
[laughs] ¡Dios mío!
You're Camila the Crusader!
Hm. Used to be.
You're the most famous explorer
in modern history.
You uncovered the ruins
of Montezuma in Mexico.
Deciphered a new Mayan codex.
Is it true you found Atlantis
off the coast of Argentina?
That was a crazy rumor.
It was Brazil.
You've been my hero
since I was like three. [gasps]
I still have my Camila the
Crusader collector's pin. See?
Wow.
[laughs] I haven't seen
one of these in years.
I'm sorry. who did
you say you were?
¡Soy Dora!
I'm your new employee.
You're the reason
I wanted to work here.
Well. that and I'm hoping
to find my next big adventure.
Dora.
Camila! [chuckles]
Ah... looks like you've come
to the right place. Dora.
[laughs] Wow. my first ever
employee badge!
- [man on walkie] ¡Epa!
- One sec.
- [walkie chirps]
- Ready.
Wild Thornberry-Go-Round
is down again.
Okay. Well... duty calls!
Wait! [panting]
Can I ask...
why did you stop exploring?
- Stop?
- What happened?
Did you lose your map too?
[chuckles] Actually. like you.
I came to Jungle World to find
my next big adventure.
Hm? Oh! And I stayed
for the churros.
[chuckles]
And. Dora. good luck!
Believe me. I am an expert
at guiding explorers
through the jungle!
¡Hola! Soy Dora. Are you ready
for an adventure?
I said. ready for an adventure?!
[cheering]
That's more like it!
Welcome aboard the Jungle Tram.
As I said. my name is Dora
and I'll be your guide today.
In the driver's seat.
we have my best friend Naiya
who I just met 15 minutes ago.
Give it up to Naiya.
Hey.
Okay. [chuckles] ¡Vámonos!
[engine chugging]
Did you know that when
Jungle World was being built.
they found a real Inca village
right there?
[gasps] I bet if you
dig deep enough.
you might find
some Inca treasure.
We can dig for treasure here?
Whoopsies. No digging
for treasure. [chuckles]
Oh man.
[Dora] Did you know most animals
in the Amazon
are found in trees?
[gasps] I can hear them.
Look up!
[excited chatter]
[monkey screeching on speakers]
[feedback whines]
- Crocodile's coming up.
- [gasps]
A crocodile!
I bet it's a black caiman.
They're the top
of the food chain.
[mechanism clacking]
[excited chatter]
Naiya. [chuckles]
Where are the real animals?
In the real jungle.
Just stick to the script. okay?
Hey. Skunk Face! Hands and feet
inside the vehicle
or I will cut them off!
Oh. I'm sure Naiya's kidding.
I'm not. That's my
little brother. Sonny.
He takes this tour every day
'cause he has no friends.
I'd like to file a complaint!
[Dora] Moving on.
We are in luck. everyone.
We are about to see
a once-in-a-lifetime event--
[gasps] A volcano explosion!
[excited chatter and cheering]
Let's count down together.
Five...
[all] Four...
three...
two...
one...
[flatulence]
[disappointed chatter]
This sucks!
Um... any questions so far?
How much longer is this?
[nervous chuckle]
[man] I want my money back.
It's over.
[sighs] Thanks for riding
the Jungle Tram.
I hope you enjoyed
the adventure.
Well. lo hicimos. We did it!
Where are you going?
We got the next tour.
* comical musical stinger *
- We have to do it again?
- Yep.
And again after that
and again after that
and again after that.
[sighs] ¡Hola! !Soy Dora!
Are you ready for an adventure?
Mango is an Amazon macaw
and she's one of the smartest
birds in the world.
- Hola. Mango.
- Hola. Guapo.
- Are you flirting with me?
They are masters
at mimicking voices.
[Mango] They're masters
- Polly want a cracker?
Hey! Who's supposed to be
in charge here. huh?
[laughter and cheering]
Ay. dios. [squawks]
So. how was your first day?
Espectacular.
Absolutamente perfecto.
That bad. huh?
Horrible!
Someone threw a churro at me.
[laughs] It'll get better.
Sometimes they throw a drink
with the churro.
and then you have a whole meal!
Diego! Hopefully one day
I'll be as good on the tram
- as you are with animals.
- About that.
Dora. there's something
I need to talk to you about.
Oh! My employee badge.
[sighs] I left it on the tram.
- You want me to wait for you?
- It's okay. I'll catch up.
Left.
Right! I knew that. [chuckles]
- * tender music plays
- [sighs]
* music fades *
- [chattering nearby]
* ominous music playing *
[pick striking rock]
[machinery whirring]
[engines roaring]
[indistinct chatter]
What are they doing here?
What are you doing here?
It's a restricted area.
- You're gonna get us in trouble.
- Shh!
- Archaeologists?
- [scoffs] No way.
See how they're digging up
historic land
with no care or respect?
Those are raiders!
[menacing chuckle]
Or pirates!
How do we stop them?
We gotta find Camila.
Camila! We found something!
Camila?
* sinister music playing *
[laughing] Hey. Señora!
[laughs] Señora. hey!
¿Está muy bueno. no? [laughs]
[loud clattering]
That's not it. Keep digging.
Wait. wait. wait. Señora.
Señora. that is Inca gold.
Treasure.
[Camila] You can buy gold
on the internet.
I am looking for
the Emperor's Bracelet.
- The Emperor's Bracelet?
- Pero why. Señora?
Pero why? All this work
for a silly bracelet?
That silly bracelet is the key
to finding Sol Dorado.
[both] Sol Dorado?
The Golden Sun has the power
to grant one wish.
Think about that.
I think Sol Dorado's a myth.
[blade swishes sharply]
We should be hunting
real treasure.
Okay. you help me find
Sol Dorado.
you and your desperados can have
all the Inca gold you can carry.
But first. the bracelet.
[gasps] ¡Vámonos!
It is buried somewhere
on these grounds.
So. what do you say. boys?
Stop bringing me laundry coins
and. uh. start digging.
[raiders chattering]
[Camila. softly]
What a bunch of meatballs.
- [clicks tongue]
- [animal growling]
We are getting closer. Swiper.
I can feel it.
[Swiper whimpering]
Who's mommy's little thief. huh?
Who's mommy's little thief?
Camila said she came
for her next big adventure.
- This is what she meant!
- Are you listening to yourself?
- Sol Dorado doesn't exist.
- How can you say that?
We've spent our whole lives
searching for it.
Yeah. and we've never found it.
You know why?
'Cause it's just a story.
- An old wives' tale.
- [scoffs] Okay. seriously?
Who are these old wives
who keep telling tales?
'Cause I have
a lot of questions for them.
[gasps] Found it!
Okay. [sighs]
Aha! The legend says
the last Inca emperor
left behind a gold bracelet
as the key to Sol Dorado.
Camila said the bracelet
is buried beneath Jungle World!
I already know you
and the answer is no.
- No as in yes?
- You can't trespass!
- It's not trespass! Explore.
- Dora. this is risky.
This is the breakthrough
we've been waiting for.
- We're so close!
- Yeah. to certain death!
No. A change in latitude
will help that attitude.
- Dora.
- Diego.
If we find Sol Dorado.
we could use the wish
to bring back Map
and go back to real exploring
in the real jungle.
* dramatic music builds
- Okay.
- [chuckle]
* adventure music playing *
[whooshing loudly]
- [splat]
- [sighs]
Thanks for riding
the Jungle Tram.
Thank you for the churro.
kind sir.
Mmm. muy delicioso. [chuckles]
I think I'm gonna take
a quick ten.
Slay.
[beeps]
* suspenseful music playing *
[grunting]
[raiders straining]
- Let's smash this sucker open!
- Hey!
Señora wants to be the first
to open it and see the bracelet.
- Let's take it to the archives.
- Okay.
[Dora gasps]
- [beep]
- [Dora yips]
[gasps]
[fabric whooshing]
La exploradora's back!
Atahualpa!
The last Inca emperor!
- [exhales]
- * mystical music plays *
Oh...
[door beeps. opens]
* suspenseful music playing *
[panting]
- [door closes]
- [footsteps]
- Dora!
- Diego!
- Mango!
- Why are you here?
- I followed you.
- You wanna help me?
I wanna make sure
you don't get us fired
- or arrested. or worse!
- Or worse!
Don't be such a chicken.
[clucking]
Hey! Whose side are you on?
If you don't want to get caught.
help me find the bracelet.
Quickly!
I thought you said
it was buried.
- They dug it up.
- [Mango] Uh-oh.
And you really think you're
gonna find it within all this?
[Mango] Ooh!
[gasping]
It's a glyph... that represents
the Golden Sun of the Incas.
Sol Dorado.
Well. go on. open it.
[Dora] I don't know how.
There's no lock.
Even if there was.
it's not like we have a key.
- Not like we have a key.
- A key!
That's it!
The riddle from the cave.
"The legend waits
for you to see.
within the sun.
you'll find the key."
[laughs. exhales]
* suspenseful music playing *
[mechanism clicking]
- [eerie. loud hissing]
- [laughing]
- Did we just find...
- The Emperor's Bracelet!
- [magnetic clang]
- [Dora gasps]
- What'd you do?
- Nothing! It did it on its own.
No. that's impossible!
I don't know what's happening!
[Mango squawking]
[whimpers]
* intense music playing *
[tropical birds singing]
[shimmering]
- Dora? Dora!
- [panting]
- Dora. you alright?
- I think I just had a vision.
I saw three entrances
and then whoosh!
There it was! Sol Dorado!
- You saw it?
- Uh-huh. [sighs]
[door beeps. opens]
- Take it off.
- I'm trying.
- Take it off. please!
- I'm trying!
- Hurry. they're coming!
- [gasps]
* suspenseful music playing *
[raider] Come. come. Señora.
Right this way.
[Camila] Where is it?
- ¿Qué? Impossible.
- [all gasp]
It was sealed...
[raiders gasp]
I think someone
must have opened it.
"I think someone
must have opened..." Find it!
[raiders chattering in Spanish]
[door closes]
[panting]
Dora. we need to
give them the bracelet!
Are you loco? We need to keep
the bracelet far away from them.
- These people are dangerous!
- Which is exactly why
we shouldn't let them
find Sol Dorado.
- Fine! Let's go this way.
- [Dora grunts]
[grunts. groans]
[gasps] Diego!
What are you doing?
Two teenagers.
One boy. one girl.
And a purple backpack.
It won't let me move.
[Camila] Listen up.
I want everybody on this.
So do not let them get away.
¿Entiendes?
* dramatic music builds. fades *
Go!
[bracelet warbles. powers down]
[sighs. pants]
Come on. let's go.
Where? We can't outrun them!
[grunts]
[bracelet warbling]
Hey. Llevamos esperando
quince minutos.
No hablo español.
We've been waiting 15 minutes!
Don't know English. either.
Wow. that quick ten turned
into a long 20.
Bad news. everyone. I'm afraid
this tour is canceled.
[patron] ¿Qué? Fine.
I'm going to the water slide.
Señora.
- Naiya. you may want to hop off.
- Why?
Diego and I are stealing
this tram.
- Diego?
- Hi.
Hi.
- What's going on?
- [both] Nothing.
Uh... wait. Diego.
as in your ex-boyfriend?
Shut up. Sonny.
- You two?
- It's a long story.
He was afraid of commitment.
There. saved you time.
- That's not what happened.
- He ghosted me.
- You asked for some space.
- While at work!
I really wanna hear this story.
but can the telenovela wait
until after we get out of here?
What's going on?
[walkie chirps]
[man on walkie]
All employees be advised.
we have a code Swiper.
Suspect has a purple backpack
and is trying to flee the park.
Oh my God.
Yes! Finally. something cool
is happening around here.
Strap in. I'm driving.
No. no. no. not happening.
This is our getaway.
And it's my tram.
Buckle up. Sonny.
I'm ready!
Wait. Are they coming. too?
No one leaves with
that bracelet. Understood?
[gasps] Time to go!
- [engine starts]
- Dora? She's got it?
Stop them!
- [engine revving]
- [raiders yelling]
[Diego] Coming through!
Watch out!
[indistinct chatter]
[gasping. yelling]
¡Perdón! Perdón. Excuse us.
Coming through!
Bad guys have entered
the group chat!
Front pocket!
[chuckles]
[screams]
- [laughs]
- This should be easy.
I love a good map!
The exit's that way!
[tires screeching]
Sonny. reload!
[people grunting]
[laughs]
Cool!
A blow dart?
Hey. be careful with that!
¡Cuidado! Watch out!
- [people screaming]
- [tires screeching]
Whoa!
Oh. what the... [groans]
[engine revs]
Huh? [grunts. groans]
You suck!
[woman] You alright?
- Oh... Oh. thank you.
- [cheering]
Did we lose him?
- Yes. but we lost Diego!
- [groans]
- What?
- You killed him?
Me? Blame the driver!
It's okay. it's a sleep dart.
He'll wake up... in a few hours.
Camila?
- We gotta ditch her!
- On it!
No! Sonny! You watch Diego.
* suspenseful music continues *
- Shortcut to the right!
- [grunts]
[snoring]
[Sonny grunting]
[man] Whoa! Watch it!
Exit straight ahead!
[motorbike engine whining]
[Sonny yells]
[thud]
Dude!
Sorry! He's heavy.
[worried chatter]
* suspenseful music continues *
Those kids are getting away.
Close the gate.
Whoo-hoo!
[continues whooping]
[Camila] No. no. no. no!
- Yeah!
- [laughing and cheering]
Yeah! Yeah!
[groans]
I want to speak to the manager!
[cheering. whooping]
- [patrons screaming]
- [guards yelling]
They're locking us in!
Hold onto your culatas!
[snoring]
[patrons gasping]
[cheers. laughs]
[Camila panting]
Okay. Dora.
[breathes deeply] Game on.
* ominous music playing *
- [Naiya] Shake him.
- [Diego groans]
- [Dora] Psst! Diego.
- [Sonny] Diego?
- [Diego groans softly]
- [gasps]
[Dora laughs] Yes!
Oh!
Welcome back. primo!
We made it to the jungle.
Did I pass out?
Someone shot you
with a sleepy dart.
Why are we wet?
[chuckles]
- [steam hissing]
- [car parts clanking]
[Diego groans]
Did I hit my head?
Looks fine to me.
Naiya?
Oh. I missed you.
* romantic music plays *
Okay. Uh. dream time is over.
[Diego groans. coughs]
[Dora] Diego. try to keep up.
[Naiya] Let me make sure
I got this.
You and Diego found
an enchanted bracelet.
we're being chased
by Camila the Crusader
and a fleet
of treasure-hunting mercenaries
with questionable morals.
and somewhere.
hidden in the world's
biggest jungle.
there is a legendary Golden Sun
which holds the power to grant
one magical wish.
Yeah.
Cool. Just checking.
The Sol Dorado grants a wish?
Can we wish we find it first?
[scoffs] Doesn't work like that.
We have to actually find it.
Out there.
[sighs]
* stirring music plays *
[Dora sighs]
We need to turn over
every stone until we find it.
That sounds like a lot of work
I'm not being paid to do.
Come on. Dora.
What about venomous snails
or giant snakes
or people that look like
The Rock with machetes!
[gasps] Ooh.
or the poison dart frog!
I love the poison dart frog.
There's no cure
so you'll die in ten minutes.
Dora. we're talking about a
journey across the jungle here.
We're not prepared.
Prepared? [scoffs] Okay...
This is Dora the Explorer
you're talking to.
* light music plays *
Backpack. let's remind Diego
how we do this thing.
I have a flashlight.
[gasps] Ukulele. Gummy bears.
Binoculars. Fuzzy socks.
[gasps]
Extra fuzzy socks. Boomerang.
Aw. a mini-ax.
[gasps] Oh! A big ax!
- [grunts]
- You brought my rescue pack?
Mm-hm.
I knew you'd change your mind.
And I brought spare clothes
and sleeping bags.
Pause. You wouldn't happen
to have an extra tram?
Yeah. right. Like that would fit
in this little backpack.
Oh! But I might have...
Aha! A medical kit.
Now we're a team.
I'm the search.
Diego's the rescue.
and Naiya's the first aid.
What about me? What am I?
So what exactly is a caddie?
- [Naiya] A burro.
- It's an ancient Inca thing.
"Caddie" means
super important helper.
That's me!
Still think this is a bad idea.
Since when did you start running
from adventures. Diego?
He runs away
from a lot of things.
[splutters] I wasn't running.
okay? I just...
Look. there's things
I want to do too.
and I can't if
I'm trekking across the jungle.
What things?
Just... important plans.
More important than finding
Sol Dorado together?
Please. Diego. I have to fix
what happened
and be an explorer again.
I can't do it alone.
Ayllu.
Through and through.
- [bird calls]
- [gasps]
* intense music plays *
[gasps. screams]
What's happening to her?
Madre de Dios.
sálvanos del diablo.
[bracelet shimmers]
[animals chittering]
- Are you alright?
- [Dora panting]
I just had another vision.
Oh. it was... I saw a tomb
and some kind of burial ground.
Tomb?
Wait. [heavy breathing]
"The legend waits
for you to see..."
"The legend... The sun..."
The key! [sighs]
The bracelet's our guide.
It's showing us
the path to Sol Dorado
and it wants us to find a tomb
beneath Inca burial ground!
Sorry. Can you go back
to "tomb"?
Was it near water?
No. it was beneath
a rocky valley
with sharp wide edges
and chulpas.
It's El Gran Valle de la Muerte!
Great! Lead the way.
* dramatic music builds. stops *
I don't know the way.
But who do we ask for help when
we don't know which way to go?
We ask the map!
Okay. Ask the map!
- I lost it.
- Bruh.
Who do we ask when the map
and Dora don't know?
Oh! [laughs] The bracelet
will tell us.
It can move on its own
and point at things.
Watch. [clears throat]
O magical bracelet.
show us... the way!
- [echoes]
- [bird chittering]
[sighs] I... I command you
to guide us. [nervous chuckle]
- [blows raspberry]
- [Diego sighs]
- [Naiya] Hmm...
- [panting]
Exploring.
It's what I'm good at.
It's literally the main thing
that I do. [sighs] Okay.
We came this way.
Let's go... this way. ¡Vamos!
[Sonny chuckles]
* ominous music playing *
[raider] ¡Señora! !Señora!
* I did it. I found
their tracks. I did it *
* They're heading south *
Vámonos. Jefa!
No. I'm gonna come down there.
[raider] Ah! Come on!
You're telling me those steps
are not heading south?
[Swiper snarling]
¡Abre! Abre. abre. abre. abre.
Nice job. Swiper. Good boy.
Come. No.
Yes. Those are decoys.
They're covering up
their tracks.
So we have to go east.
You think the kid's
really that smart?
Dora is an expert explorer.
I underestimated her once...
and I am not doing it again.
So. simply out of.
uh. curiosity...
[insect buzzes]
What? I really like Naiya.
Why didn't you tell me
you two were dating?
Because it's my business.
Since when did you start
keeping secrets?
Are we there yet?
- It's gotta be this way!
- Really?
That's what you said
the last four directions.
Actually. it's this way.
I'm certain of it.
- We're gonna get lost.
- Think positive!
I'm positive...
that we're gonna
get lost out here.
[Boots yells. laughs]
- [all] Whoa!
- Dora!
Boots! [laughs]
- What are you doing here?
- I got worried about you.
So I've been swinging
on treetops till I heard you!
Ai-yiyi!
[Boots chittering]
- She speaks monkey?
- Yep.
- Copy that.
- I'm so glad you're here.
We're on our way
to find Sol Dorado.
Yeah. you and
the raiders right be--
[chittering]
That must mean Camila
and the bad guys are chasing us!
We're being followed?
We need to hide!
[Boots chitters]
There's a burial ground
about 40 swings away.
We can hide there. ¡Vámonos!
Wait. you mean
the burial ground is close?
- [Boots chitters affirmatively]
- See. Dora?
You were leading us
the right way the whole time.
Nice to meet you.
Mr. Boots. Up top.
I like him!
Hey. monkey.
Uh. her not so much.
[Boots chitters. growls]
Well. decide later.
Right now. lead the way!
- * stirring music plays
- [tropical birds calling]
[Dora gasps]
[Dora laughs softly]
This is it. From my vision.
I didn't think the Incas came
this far through the jungle.
* music turns ominous
Unless they were trying
to hide something.
[Boots chitters]
[laughing. panting]
The key. [exhales]
[mechanism whirring]
[all gasp]
[gasps]
Boots. Keep a look out.
Aye-aye. Dora.
* uneasy music playing *
[door lumbering shut]
- [upbeat music plays]
- [Diego] Whoa!
Sorry about that.
[music stops]
[gasps] Hope no one's
afraid of bugs.
Not me. I love bugs.
Bugs?
- * eerie music plays
- [Naiya groans]
[eerie chittering]
I don't love these bugs.
[sighs happily]
[Naiya groans]
I got you.
[loud crunch]
I just stepped on one of them.
Hoping it wasn't a cucaracha.
- No. you're good.
- Yeah?
Yeah. yeah.
It's just a couple of bones.
[Naiya gasps]
- [gasps]
- * suspenseful music playing *
[Naiya] Ew. Ew. Ew. Ugh. gross!
* dramatic music playing *
Pro tip: If you ever find a
mysterious lever inside a tomb.
don't pull it.
Wasn't gonna.
[gasps. laughs]
- Another quipu.
- A what-poo?
A quipu. The ancient language
of the Incas.
Like this. Diego and I
each have one.
We tie a knot
for every adventure.
- [Dora speaks Quechua]
- [ominous otherworldly breaths]
[continues speaking Quechua]
"The halls"? "The walls"?
"Measure the treasure"?
"Among these halls
is your true measure.
give into the walls
your life for the treasure."
I don't love that.
* eerie music plays *
* eerie musical stinger
[loud clunk]
Sonny! She said
don't pull the lever!
What's a lever?
[rumbling]
That's not good.
[rumbling continues]
- [fire roaring]
- [gasping]
* music intensifies *
Definitely not good.
[Dora gasps] What?
[Sonny] The walls are moving!
[Diego] They're not moving.
they're closing!
Look for some kind of switch!
Undo! Undo! Undo!
[Dora muttering]
If you were magical.
now would be a really
good time to help out!
Anything?
Nothing over here. Sonny?
Uh. nope! Don't come over here!
[groans. pants]
[grunting]
Oh! Dora. what do we do?
We have... [panting]
Give into the walls.
Give into the walls...
A life for the treasure...
A life for the treasure!
It's a grave!
- We have to get into the grave!
- Do what?
Isn't that what
we're trying to avoid?
The Incas wanted us to lay down
our lives for the treasure.
- It's a test.
- No! It's a death trap.
Trust me. this will work!
[scoffs] Come on!
You know. driving a tram
doesn't seem so bad anymore.
Jump in! ¡Vámonos!
[Dora yelps. strains]
[grunting]
[otherworldly cackling]
Diego!
I got you!
[mechanism whirring]
[mechanism thuds]
[Sonny whispers] Are we dead?
[all scream. grunt]
[all groaning]
Ooh!
[sighs]
* eerie musical stinger
[screams]
Ow. My culatas.
Are you alright?
I don't know.
I'm afraid to get up.
Mm. But could you?
'Cause you're kinda...
- Oh. sorry.
- [coughs. sighs]
That was so scary.
My entire life flashed
before my eyes.
What life? You're nine.
* intriguing music plays *
[gasps]
[grunting]
It's an Ayllu light!
See how by combining
each individual light
it creates a stronger one?
Looks like a charm
for the bracelet.
* dramatic music swells *
[twinkling]
[Dora gasps]
[bracelet shimmers]
[all gasp]
[laughs] Yes!
[bracelet shimmers]
[tropical birds singing]
* intense music playing *
* music softens *
[gasps. pants]
We... We did it!
I got the next clue!
What'd you see?
The macaws of Cinchona!
I've always wanted to go there
and it's not far from here.
Oh. this is gonna be great!
[thunder clapping]
- It's a little sprinkle.
- Come on. Dora.
We've passed that scary-looking
tree 30 times already.
Can't we go back to
the cave for shelter?
Where's that cave at again?
Phone's dead.
We are for sure lost.
We just need to go south.
So. find the Chakana!
But the sun's still out.
We should set up camp
before it gets too dark.
We can't risk getting
even more lost. Dora.
[Boots chitters]
[thunder rumbles]
[chittering]
* suspenseful music playing *
So the bracelet led them here.
And down in that tomb
is the first trial.
Clever.
Their tracks are getting
harder to follow...
so we need to keep moving.
Well. that will be tough
once it gets dark.
Swiper can help with that.
* music fades *
Ouch! You're a terrible doctor!
'Cause I'm not a doctor. dummy!
That's why I can do this.
Ow!
You can't treat me like that!
I'm the caddie!
News flash: a caddie is
just somebody who tags along.
You're not actually
essential. Sonny.
- Do you have another Band-Aid?
- Yeah. why?
'Cause you're gonna need it!
[grunts] Oh. you are dead.
[loud hiss]
What's that?
[gasps] Snake!
Oh my God. get the ax!
No. no. no. don't hurt it!
Ew. ew. ew. don't touch it! Ugh!
[Naiya panting]
It's a boa constrictor.
They're friendly. Non-venomous.
Still got a thing
for snakes. huh?
I like all animals.
And sometimes...
I think they like me back.
Yeah. Who wouldn't?
* romantic music swells *
[groans]
[monkeys chittering]
I think the other monkeys
were trying to be friendly.
Friendly? Oh! They threw
their poop at us. Dora.
Oh! Bunch of animals. Eww. caca!
At this rate. I'd rather use the
magical wish to go back home.
Or at least somewhere warm.
Or where I was supposed to be...
[chitters]
I mean. uh. just somewhere else.
We don't belong out here.
you know?
Maybe Dora's right.
Without her map. she doesn't
know where to lead us.
[chitters sadly]
Hey. You're still
my favorite explorer.
[Boots coos]
- I'm back!
- Find anything?
Uh... no. I'm sorry.
We should get some sleep.
But someone needs to
stay awake to be on lookout.
For raiders or things
that want to eat us.
- [Boots screeches]
- Any volunteers?
I'll do it.
I can stay awake. I swear!
My teachers say I have
boundless energy.
Alright. just wake one of us up
in an hour. Okay?
Then we'll trade off.
Just don't fall asleep.
Trust me. I won't fall asleep.
[snoring]
[Boots chitters sleepily]
* uneasy music playing *
* music turns ominous *
[growling]
Hello?
[soft snarling]
[snickering mischievously]
* music fades *
Backpack is missing! [panting]
What? How?
I don't know. it was
by the fire last night
and now it's gone!
- Someone must have swiped it.
- Oh man.
Not the end of the world. right?
- We still have your backpack.
- Mine's just a rescue pack.
Dora's had all our stuff in it.
The survival gear. food. water.
It's more than just a backpack.
It's Backpack. It's been with me
on every adventure.
First Map. now Backpack. [sighs]
I'm losing everything.
What do we do?
[chitters sadly]
I don't think there's anything
we can do.
Without your backpack
we won't survive
for another day out here.
I think we should go home.
Home? I can't go home.
not until we find Sol Dorado.
I need the wish to bring back
Map and Backpack.
- We have to keep going.
- It's too dangerous.
We've already come this far.
And where are we?
We're lost in the jungle.
Please. Diego.
I need to finish this.
Then you'll have
to finish it alone.
What happened to Ayllu?
I'm sorry. Dora.
We're going home.
- Oh!
- [bracelet clangs]
- Huh?
- What the--
[grunting]
* exciting music plays *
How'd it do that?
Why'd it do that?
I don't know! I...
I think it wants you to stay.
It chose you to be
the next leader!
I don't want it.
Thank you for the opportunity.
it's very kind of you.
but I'd like to respectfully
pass at this time.
[grunts. groans]
[groans]
Naiya. little help. please?
The only way to get it off
is to find Sol Dorado!
Forget it. I'm leaving.
Whoa!
[grunts] Aw. come on. seriously?
- Whoa!
- [Naiya] Stand back.
[grunting]
I don't even want this!
Déjalo. Leave it.
* somber music plays *
- Not going anywhere.
- [bracelet powers down]
You win. Dora.
[Dora sighs]
I don't get it.
This is who we are.
We're Dora and Diego.
we love going on adventures.
So what's changed?
What's with all the secrets?
What's the real reason
you don't want to be here?
I never wanted
your adventure. okay?
I was supposed to be on
my own adventure.
What are you talking about?
I got accepted to the New York
College of Zoology.
This program's taking
ten students
to live in New York City
for the year.
I was only working at
Jungle World to save up for it.
And my flight leaves today
and if I'm not on it...
they're gonna give my spot
to someone else.
Which looks pretty likely
right now given that
I probably won't be able
to get back home in time.
Because in typical Dora fashion.
I'm chasing long-lost legends
through the freakin' jungle.
- [Sonny] Whoa!
- [Boots chitters]
You want to leave the jungle?
Come on. Dora.
You didn't think I'd want
to do this forever. did you?
Look. I tried to tell you.
So many times but...
I just thought you'd try
to talk me out of it.
Diego. I--
Let's just keep moving. yeah?
We're on an adventure. remember?
Whether I like it or not.
* somber music continues *
[fly buzzing]
* intriguing music plays *
[tropical birds calling]
* music turns dramatic *
[birds calling]
* music swells *
[Dora chuckles]
* music becomes tense *
[Boots chitters]
[whirring]
[door scraping loudly]
I got it.
[grunting]
[Boots chittering]
[vines snapping]
[screaming]
[Sonny gasps softly]
Whoa!
That's fun.
- Wish us luck. monkey.
- [grumbles]
[chittering]
[screaming]
[panting]
* ominous music playing *
Spikes. Why wouldn't
there be spikes?
I'm guessing that platform
is where we need to go.
Hey. look! More qui-- qui-qua...
More strings that
tell us things! Over there.
[Sonny grunts]
[Naiya groans]
[Diego speaking Quechua]
"Beware the vines"?
[Dora speaking Quechua]
"Swing."
Hey. How'd you learn all this?
Our Abuelo taught us.
Hey. "Beware the vines
as you endeavor.
to swing these strings
you must be clever."
[Sonny] I found something!
[grunts. sighs]
* dramatic music playing *
[flashlight clicks]
[exhales] It's a grid.
These are numbers.
"Beware the vines"?
- Dora. no! ¡Actívate!
- [Dora screams]
[Dora panting]
- Grab my hand!
- [grunting]
[both panting]
Thank you.
Thank the orange rope.
[wind blowing]
"To swing these strings
you must be clever."
It's a puzzle!
Oh! I love puzzles!
And based on this grid.
it involves some kind of math.
Oh. Never mind.
But what does
it mean by strings?
[gasps] It's a quipu!
Yeah. we read them already.
No. the vines are quipus.
They're not words.
they're numbers.
Every vine has a different
amount of stones.
so each vine has to be
its own number.
I think we have to follow
the order on the grid!
Anyone good with math?
Yeah. She does sudoku every day!
A game on my phone
with numbers I know.
not ancient Inca.
Better than nothing!
[whimpers]
Two circles should be ten.
This might be seven.
Ten minus seven. Three?
Try three.
[Dora gasps]
Wait. Dora...
why don't you let me?
I dropped the orange rope.
If you fall. I can't rescue you.
It's okay. I'll be fine.
* suspenseful music playing *
[Dora panting]
[grunting]
See. prima? I got this.
Now go help Naiya!
- Keep going!
- I'm not sure what it says.
Fine! I'll just be waiting here.
Like when you left
my text on read.
I cannot believe
you're still holding onto that.
Just barely!
Much like this vine!
- Um...
- Any day now!
[groans] Try five!
[grunts] Finally!
- [rope snaps]
- [grunts]
- Diego!
- Primo!
I get you're still mad
about the break-up
but this is a bit excessive!
I'm so sorry!
I really thought it was five.
- Let me try again!
- Hey!
Take a deep breath.
You can do this.
[breathes deeply]
- Okay.
- Okay. Okay.
So if that's three
and that's not five...
Okay...
[gasps] Okay. it's one!
Vine number one!
I can't find that vine!
* suspenseful music continues *
This one!
¿Estás loca?
I can't reach that!
Are you sure it's a one?
Yes! I'm sure of it.
Why don't you trust me?
[Diego panting]
[grunts. sighs]
- You made it!
- See?
I trust you.
Okay. One more row
and then you're done.
Oh no. this one doesn't
have anything on it.
That can't be right.
They must all have a number!
No. it's completely empty.
Nothing? What number
means nothing?
- [both] Zero!
- [gasps]
[Diego] Oh. I'm gonna die.
* intense music plays
[grunting]
[all gasp]
[cheering]
[Sonny] Good job!
[laughs] Whoo-hoo!
[mechanism rumbling]
[Diego] Come on! Come on!
* wistful music playing *
Oh. Thanks. dude. [grunts]
You could have been killed.
Can't get rid of me that easy.
I'm still here.
Thanks to Naiya.
Thanks for trusting me.
Considering the fact
that I'm always right.
it was the logical choice.
* intriguing music plays
Another charm!
[charm shimmers]
Are we sure we want
to keep going?
Don't really have a choice.
* music turns melancholy *
[magnetic clang]
* dramatic music swells *
Why isn't it working?
I-I don't know.
* soft music playing *
Where's Dora?
You guys go ahead
and find Boots.
We'll catch up.
Dora...
[Dora sniffles]
I've never seen you like this.
What's going on?
[crying] I can't do it.
Hey. it's okay to be scared.
But we made it out!
- ¡Estamos bien!
- Not for Dora the Explorer.
I'm not the girl who gets scared
or gets lost
or grabs booby-trapped vines
like some idiota!
I need my map.
Dora. you don't need the map.
You're wrong.
I don't know who I am now.
but... I'm not
an explorer anymore.
[sighs]
Escúchame.
Two days ago you discovered
this long-lost bracelet
with magical powers.
Yesterday you were diving
into a grave of bones.
Today you made
a tiny vine mistake.
but you are an explorer. Dora.
Because of you. Diego!
[sobs] The reason I can run
so fearlessly into adventure
is because you are always there
to rescue me.
You are always there.
[sniffles]
I've lost everything already.
I can't lose you. too.
You are never
gonna lose me. okay?
No matter where our journeys
lead us...
we'll always be together
where it counts.
Ayllu?
[sniffles. sighs]
Through and through.
[Dora sighs]
- [bracelet chimes]
- It's happening!
* intense music plays *
[tropical birdcalls echoing]
[Dora squeals. laughs]
Wow. these visions are freaky.
You get used to it. [chuckles]
I saw it. It was amazing.
The final passageway?
[breathing rapidly] Sol Dorado.
Great news. explorers.
We got our final clue.
Ha! The Incas hid the Golden Sun
inside the Temple of Light.
* ominous music playing *
[Camila] Thanks for the tip.
Dora.
[Swiper growls]
That is good news.
Boy. Dora.
you were hard to find.
You kept going this way.
then that way.
then this way. then that way.
and I thought.
man. this girl is good.
An expert explorer
throwing us off the scent.
But now I realize that
you were never good.
You were just... lost.
But that's okay.
We got it from here.
[machete swishes]
[all grunting]
[Dora] No!
- No! You can't do this!
- Let her go!
Mm. If she doesn't take off
the bracelet.
cut off her arm.
[gasps] No! No!
Stop! Stop!
She doesn't have it. okay?
The bracelet chose both of them.
That's a twist.
Okay. Cut off his arm. then.
[Dora] No! No. please. don't!
The gold or the arm. boy.
No! Stop!
* suspenseful music playing *
[Dora] No!
- [bracelet pulses loudly]
- [all groan]
Ha!
Whoa.
It is magic.
Fine. The boy comes with us.
He'll help us get to Sol Dorado.
- Take them.
- [Dora] No!
- And their little monkey. too.
- [chittering]
No! You can't take them. Diego!
Dora!
- You won't be needing this!
- No!
- [Dora] Boots!
- [Boots] Dora!
[grunting]
[indistinct chatter]
[Boots chitters angrily]
[grunting. whimpering] No!
Well. Dora.
It seems like we both found
what we were looking for. Hm?
Well. no. I found it.
You... you lost it.
[rocks clattering]
[screaming]
[grunting]
* grim music plays *
[Naiya breathes shakily]
[birds calling]
* mystical music plays *
[insects chirring]
* music becomes tense *
[raiders chattering]
[Boots whimpering]
[grunting]
[raiders chattering]
* somber music playing *
[Swiper snarls]
[growling]
I ain't scurred!
[laughs. blows raspberry]
No. This is a dead end.
Alright. where's
the entrance to the temple?
I don't know. Dora's the one
that always figures things out.
Why is the bracelet on you
and not her?
I don't know. okay?
It just chose me.
No. I think you do know.
Alright. everybody spread out
and look for an entrance.
[raiders grumbling]
[tropical birds calling]
[coughing]
[inhales sharply. coughs]
[groans]
[bird squawking]
[eerie droning]
- [buzzing]
- [whimpering]
[animals calling]
[groans]
[whimpering]
[creature shrieking nearby]
[breathing rapidly]
* ominous music playing *
[groans]
* music softens *
* serene music plays *
- [rustling]
- [gasps]
[whooshing]
* mystical music plays *
[soft gasp]
Wherever you want to go.
just close your eyes
and imagine it.
and the map will get you there.
I'm the map...
Well. maybe you don't
need a map.
He is right. mi chiquita.
You already know
the jungle better than any map.
I'm the map?
Lead the way. exploradora!
[breathing heavily] I'm the map?
* I'm the map.
I'm the map. I'm the map *
[gasps] I'm the map!
The Chakana!
- * stirring music plays
- [gasps]
* music intensifies *
* music fades *
Sonny. there's a pair of
scissors inside my medical kit.
Can you dig them out?
* uneasy music playing *
[panting softly]
- Why are you doing all this?
- Same reason you are.
You know. your cousin and I.
we're not so different.
Dora is nothing like you.
Dora is good.
[Camila] She could have been
good with a little training.
but the truth is...
Dora will never be
the explorer that I am.
[Diego] I'm not talking about
being a good explorer.
I'm talking about being
a good person.
* uneasy music continues *
[flashlight clicks]
[Sonny straining]
Señora. I think I just
found something.
* music brightens *
* dramatic music playing *
[all laughing]
It's a door! Open it! Now!
- [Diego] Just say the word.
- What word?
¡Actívate!
[raiders clamoring and grunting]
[all groan]
Gold-Tooth! Stop them!
- Hey! You forgot something.
- Wasn't there another kid?
He's not a kid. He's our caddie.
- Your what? [groans]
- [grunts]
It means super important helper!
Remember when I said
you weren't essential?
I take it all back.
Naiya! Grab the dial!
Sonny. help Boots!
- [Sonny] Get away from him!
- [Swiper growls. whimpers]
Hey. Boots.
Go swipe that Swiper!
Swiper. no swiping.
I'm gonna fox you up!
Hold my boots!
[Boots chitters]
* suspenseful music playing *
Let's go!
[all panting]
[rope retracting]
- [groaning]
- [blade swishes]
Beetle! The door!
Welcome back. Dora the Explorer!
I knew you could find us.
I told you. I'm the search
and the rescue now.
[Camila] You didn't
rescue anybody.
So how did you find us
without your little map?
Turns out I never needed it.
Just like you don't
need to do this.
You're not the only one
who lost something. Dora.
What happened to you?
When did you stop being
Camila the Crusader?
When the world stopped
believing in me.
- ¡Vamos!
- [theme song plays on TV]
[Camila]
The Tomb of Inti Kancha...
Hello. Crusaders!
It was supposed to be
my crowning achievement.
A great big televised event.
The world was watching me!
Live!
Come with me. ¡Vamos!
But when we opened that tomb...
nothing.
No treasure. no history.
Just dust and humiliation.
And overnight.
the world turned
its back on me.
dismissing Camila the Crusader
as a joke.
[derisive laughter]
In that moment.
my career was over
and I was all alone.
But that wasn't gonna be
how my story ended.
And ever since. I've never
stopped looking for Sol Dorado.
And I never will.
The Golden Sun is mine. Dora.
To prove to myself
and to the world
that I am still
Camila the Crusader.
I didn't care about
your failure.
The Camila I grew up with...
she was my hero.
I may have lost my map. but...
you lost your inner compass.
* sad music playing *
[sniffles]
[coos mockingly]
[snickers]
[door clunks loudly]
* ominous music playing *
Pro tip: Do not pull that.
[sighs]
Wait! [gasps]
* intense. ominous music
playing *
[gasping]
Santa María. Madre de Dios...
We're rich.
I'll never have to drive
a tram again.
* eerie music plays *
[Dora] Atahualpa.
* hopeful. mystical music
plays *
[exhaling] Okay.
[speaking Quechua]
[continues speaking Quechua]
"To count"?
The quipus.
They speak in metaphors.
Try again.
But wait. where's Sol Dorado?
Maybe it's that.
[Naiya] Why would it be that?
If you need to hide
a magical sun.
wouldn't you
disguise it as a llama?
It's not here.
This doesn't match my vision.
"Beneath the gold..."
[both] "...a choice to weigh.
the prize is what
you give away."
[laughs] Forget about
Sol Dorado. eh?
We can buy a thousand wishes
with all of this.
- [both] Don't touch anything!
- It's a test of character.
The Inca had more gold
than all the empires combined.
The Incas. they didn't care
about the treasure...
They didn't even bury
their rich with treasure.
[laughs] The Incas valued
something bigger.
[soft tinkling]
[both] They worshiped the sun!
Don't know how I feel
about them bonding.
- [Camila] Okay.
- "Beneath the gold.
a choice to weigh..."
There! That's the door
to Sol Dorado!
How are we gonna cross
over there?
* dramatic music swells
The prize is what
you give away...
[gold ornaments rattling]
No. no. no! No. wait!
¿Qué estás haciendo? No!
[gasps]
* dramatic music swells *
Wait... these are
Chimu-Inca scales.
This is how the Inca
weighed their gold.
So. in order to open the door...
Then we need to fill the scales
with the weight
before it goes up!
Everybody! Ayllu!
Come on! Like the Incas wanted!
We gotta fill the scales
before they hit the top!
[scale creaking]
[grunting]
Hey. you promised me
all the gold.
All the Inca gold
I can carry. remember?
[grunting]
This is how we get
to Sol Dorado.
Al diablo with Sol Dorado!
A deal is a deal. Camila.
[Diego] Help me! The scale
needs more weight! [grunts]
Stop!
You can't be serious!
[gasps]
Go! Come on. come on! Go!
- I said stop!
- [gasps]
This gold is mine.
Hey! Get away from her.
¿Y tú. Camila?
These kids have made you soft.
But not me.
Dora! You and your friends
go find Sol Dorado.
I'm gonna get us out
of this mess.
- What?
- [creaking]
[yells. grunts]
[Dora gasps] No!
[all gasping]
[fighting grunts]
[Dora] No!
[grunting]
Come on! We gotta move fast!
Before the bridge collapses!
- [Sonny] It's too high!
- I have an idea.
[gasps] It's working!
[groans]
[Camila groans]
[sighs]
[grunting]
This is very therapeutic for me!
[Dora]
Keep going. everyone! Ayllu!
[grunting]
[Camila groans]
Camila! Take this.
* dramatic music continues *
[loud creaking]
[scale creaking]
Only one more left!
[fighting grunts]
[whimpering]
[yells]
Okay. fine. fine! [yelping]
Fine! Fine. fine! Gah!
I don't need
all this gold. [groans]
- But I'll take this!
- No! Sonny!
[Sonny screams. grunts]
[panting. groaning]
[scale creaking]
[Naiya] Here!
Here. grab this!
- [giggling]
- [Sonny grunts]
[giggles]
[grunting]
[giggling] ¡Adiós!
Oh. my gold!
[echoing scream]
A little help! Please?
- Oh!
- [grunting]
Can you grab my arm?
Grab my arm.
[all grunting]
Thank you.
Let's work together.
We can do this.
Come on. everybody. Ayllu!
[all] Ayllu. Ayllu. Ayllu!
[straining and grunting]
* dramatic music playing *
[scale creaking]
Why is it still going up?
We need more weight.
Everybody. grab any object
left behind. Go!
* suspenseful music playing *
This is the last thing
we had left.
[sighs]
[scale clunking]
We don't have enough treasure
to make it go down
and open the door.
Beetle fell with all the gold
we needed for the last scale.
We're trapped here for life.
* sad music plays *
[sighs]
* music turns dramatic *
This is all my fault.
[Dora] What do you mean?
I think this is where
my adventure ends.
No!
[breathing rapidly]
[scale creaking]
[panting]
[rumbling]
- [bracelet shimmers]
- Whoa!
[panting]
[gasps] Camila!
You're alive! [laughs]
Come on. let's find Sol Dorado.
Together.
Uh-huh. Yeah.
[Sonny] You can fly?
[Camila] What?
I guess I can now.
[chuckles] Yeah.
* uneasy music playing *
[gasps]
For a second I thought
the charm was Sol Dorado.
[chuckles] No. we have
to complete the bracelet
and then Sol Dorado
will be revealed to us.
Camila. Do the honors.
[magnetic shimmer]
[bracelet powers down]
* music fades *
* ominous music playing *
Are you sure
we're in the right temple?
This doesn't make any sense.
In my vision.
I saw Sol Dorado right here.
Right in this plinth!
Did we just survive
all the trials for nothing?
Wait. give her a second. guys.
La Dora's onto something.
The emperor's bracelet
is the key to Sol Dorado.
* music turns dramatic *
I. um... I don't think
it should be me.
The bracelet chose you.
Okay.
Here goes...
* tense music playing *
- [loud click]
- Ow. ow. ow!
[screaming]
[wails in pain]
Just kidding.
[sighing]
There's something there.
- [metallic clinking]
- [rumbling]
* dramatic music building *
Did we just find...
Sol Dorado. [sighs]
Are you ready to make your wish?
No.
No. this wish is yours. Dora.
But... what about you?
My wish was to become
Camila the Crusader again...
and you helped me do that.
So thank you.
Don't look at me.
I just wanted a vacation.
[laughs]
I'd like a pet turtle.
Camila's right.
This is your wish.
[soft twinkling]
This was my wish.
To have a great adventure
with you.
But what about Map?
I am the map.
I am Dora the Explorer.
My wish already came true.
* dramatic music building *
It's time...
for you to get your wish.
* music crescendos *
[soft twinkling]
Dora. hurry up!
Your wish got
my internship back.
don't make me lose it again.
Wait! Don't forget
Captain Cappy!
Unfortunately. I don't think
my new landlord allows animals.
It's a baby capybara.
Look how cute!
Can I watch over him. then?
Sure. dude.
Yes! Who needs a dumb turtle?
I've got a capybara.
[chitters happily]
I downloaded sudoku on my phone.
For the flight.
[chuckles] I'll call you.
You know. to check up on you.
As your doctor.
[chuckles] Doctor. of course.
I'm-I'm really sorry
for pulling away from you.
You came back.
* soft music plays *
I don't want you to be
hungry in New York.
So I made a tiny snack
of tamales.
ropa vieja y pastelitos.
Your favorite.
¡Gracias. Abuela!
Thank you. Mom.
- Watch out!
- [all chattering]
[chuckling]
Adiós.
I'll miss you guys.
- Take care.
- We're gonna miss you.
Gonna miss you. too.
Don't you dare say adiós.
¿Hasta luego?
[laughs] Hasta pronto.
[sniffling]
Just because we'll be apart
doesn't mean
we won't be together.
- Ayllu.
- Through and through.
[distant birdcall]
Hey. I'll be back
before you know it. okay?
I believe you.
* tender music plays *
Or hey! If you ever want
another adventure.
come visit me in New York City
sometime!
[indistinct chatter]
* Voy a seguir mi corazón *
* So I keep climbing *
* Climbing through
the darkness *
- * I'm only getting started
- [yelps] Whoo!
* But then I see clear
I like the view from here *
* It's full of technicolors *
* And the sun is
my umbrella... *
Go have an adventure.
* I like the view from here *
* "View From Here"
by Charity Dew plays *
[Dora] The Green Flash!
[chuckles] Dora!
Hurry back. Dora!
[chuckles] Hey!
¿Qué pasa. Boots?
Dora! Dora! Did you check
your backpack yet?
[chuckling] No. why?
* So I keep climbing.
climbing through the darkness *
[chittering happily]
[Diego] For your next adventure.
Love. Diego.
* I like the view from here *
[chittering happily]
* I like the view from here
Where do we go to next?
¡Vámonos!
* I like the view from here *
* "Don't Go Yet"
by Camila Cabello playing *
* I imagined myself in satin *
* The room was
platinum and gold *
* I'd dance and catch your eye.
you'd be mesmerized. oh *
* We'd find a corner there.
your hands in my hair *
* Finally. we're here. so why *
* Sayin' you got a flight.
need an early night? No *
* Don't go yet *
* Oye. don't go yet
Don't go yet *
* What you leavin' for
when my night is yours? *
* Just a little more.
don't go yet *
* Baby. don't go yet *
* 'Cause I wore this dress
for a lil' drama *
* And I bet *
* I bet you think that you
know. but you don't *
* Baby. come to mama *
* I get
I get what I want when I want *
* I get it how I want it
when I *
* And I want you. baby
Gotta get you. baby *
* We'd find a corner there.
your hands in my hair *
* Finally. we're here. so why *
* Sayin' you got a flight.
need an early night? No *
* Oye. don't go yet
Don't go yet *
* What you leaving for
when my night is yours? *
* Don't go yet *
* "View From Here"
by Charity Dew plays *
* I don't know
how to be broken *
* Should be picking up
the pieces *
* But they're heavy
on my mind *
* I been caught inside
a labyrinth *
* And I'm starting to believe *
* These walls
are mountain-high *
* But something is calling *
* I know I'm not done *
* A louder reminder
of who I've become *
* A huntress. a fighter *
* Como un león *
* Voy a seguir mi corazón *
* So I keep climbing
* Climbing through
the darkness *
* I'm only getting started *
* But then I see clear *
* I like the view from here *
* It's full of technicolors
* And the sun is my umbrella *
* The clouds have disappeared *
* I like the view from here *
[vocalizing]
* I been walking
on a tightrope *
* Kept stepping over shadows *
* Till my feet found
solid ground *
* Now something has shifted *
* I'm not who I was *
* The fire burns brighter *
* Can't break me now *
* A phoenix. a warrior *
* Como un tambor *
* Ahora escucho mi propia voz *
* So I keep climbing *
* Climbing through
the darkness *
* I'm only getting started *
* But then I see clear *
* I like the view from here *
* It's full of technicolors
* And the sun is my umbrella *
* The clouds have disappeared *
* I like the view from here *
[vocalizing]
* And every step that I take *
* Gets better and better *
* I want this feeling to stay
forever and ever *
* I fell and I stumbled *
* I kept getting up though *
* Now nothing can stand
in my way *
* No. nada puede detenerme *
* So I keep climbing *
* Climbing through
the darkness *
* I'm only getting started *
* But then I see clear *
* I like the view from here *
* It's full of technicolors
* And the sun is my umbrella *
* The clouds have disappeared *
* I like the view from here *
[vocalizing]
* I'm only getting started *
* I like the view from here *
* Every step that I take *
* Paso y paso *
* I like the view from here *
* Dora the Explorer
theme music playing *
- [Boots] Dora!
- [Dora] Boots!
* Doo. do-doo. doo. doo. Dora *
* Whoo! *
* Dora. Dora
Dora the Explorer *
* Dora! *
* Boots and super cool
exploradora! *
[Dora] I need your help!
Grab your backpack! Let's go!
Jump in! ¡Vámonos!
* You can lead the way *
- * Hey. hey!
- * Doo-doo Dora *
* Swiper. no swiping
Swiper. no swiping *
* Doo-doo Dora
Doo-doo Dora *
* Dora. Dora
Dora the Explorer *
* Doo. do-doo. doo. doo
Dora! *